Now that we're familiar with the HVM L5 canvas element we're going to be making a clock so this will
show us how far we can go with the skills that we learned in the previous video is actually an idea
that I got from the W3 school's website that I thought was really cool.
And so this is what we're going to be making in this video.
It does have some reasonably complex math in it.
So be prepared to watch my video if you haven't done math for quite a while because you do need to work
out some angles and also lengths from say the center to the number one to make the numbers and hands
appear in the right place.
But other than that all of the skills are what we covered in the previous video.
So I'll give you a moment to pause the video and try and recreate what you've got in front of you here.
Best of luck.
OK.
Hope you manage to have a good step of that.
So let's start by setting up our canvas
so I'll give it an idea of clock and a with
of five hundred and a height of 500 as well.
And then we'll add scripts.
Let's not forget a quick message
just in case the user is using an old browser.
And then let's create a canvas variable which is going to be document get element by ID
and also how context
is canvas to all get context to the.
I also want a variable to specify the radius of my clock which is simply going to be half the width
of the canvas.
So let's use clock radius and we'll put that equal to a canvas dot with divided by C.
And because I like to check these things it's just to let the value of the radius get to 50.
Perfect.
All right.
And now let's draw the clock circle.
So we'll do this using context don't begin path.
Then we'll set up our arc and this is going to have a center of clock radius come a clock radius which
is the center of our canvas.
A radius of clock radius and we're going to start at zero and go all the way round.
So 2 times pi
and then we want to draw it.
But this time we don't want to just have an arc.
We want to fill it in.
So we use context dot.
PHIL.
All right let's have a look.
There we go.
That looks good.
Now for the tricky part the numbers.
So we're going to do this with text.
So let's use context.
Funt
and let's try making this about a tenth of the radius in terms of pixels we might need to tweak that
a little bit use Let's use clock radius.
Divide it by 10 then plus
pixels and Aeriel and then we'll need to set the Phil style
to white.
And the challenge here is going to be getting the positioning right.
I'm going to use to lay out instructions to make my life a little bit easier.
First one is text a line which is center so that will make the text aligned at the center of the horizontal
position where I put it.
And we can do the same with the vertical position using text baseline is middle.
So this will essentially put the text in the center horizontally and vertically of where I put it rather
than at the bottom left.
And for now we'll just start with the 12.
So let's put that in
context of filled text 12 and we'll put it just at the center of a circle for the moment.
So that's clock radius comma clock radius and there we get now the 12 of course we want to appear up
here.
So for the 12 the x coordinate is already correct the y coordinate needs to be decreased by a little
bit less than the clock radius.
So I'm going to subtract clock radius times no point nine from that to get it near the top.
All right.
Now that was the easy one.
The tricky one is going to be the next one so the one essentially.
So this is where we're going to need math so let's copy what we've got so far.
But this time we want the one.
Now if you imagine a line going from the center of the circle to where we want our one to be that line
has a length of clock radius times no point nine because it's a little bit less than the clock radius.
And essentially we want to work out the vertical distance from the center to that point and the horizontal
distance.
And that's why we use sine and cause if you manage to look those up and figure out how to use them then
congratulations.
If not then worry about it.
It's quite mathematically specific.
Essentially the up movement is going to be this length multiplied by cause of the angle and the horizontal
movement is going to be this length multiplied by the sign of the angle.
So let's try and get that right.
So for the horizontal We want to I don't I think I'll make it longer here.
Pluck radius multiplied by.
Here we want math.
Sign of the angle which is
two times math don't pi.
Remember is all the way round.
But we only want to get a twelfth of the way round.
So we're going to divide that by 12 and I actually want to multiply picklock clock radius by point nine
because I want to go nine tenths of the way out to the numbers rather than to the edge.
So that looks good.
Looks like it's moved it along about the right amount.
We now want to move it down the right amount as well.
So it's actually pretty similar to before that instead of subtracting just clock radio times no point
in time which would take it vertically up.
We tracked clock radio times no point nine times cause of the angle so that's multiplied by math don't
cause
two times math Daube PI divided by 12 because we're dividing the full circle into 12 equal parts.
Phew.
So don't worry too much if you didn't follow all the math going on there.
This is the point at which you should be able to carry on and finish the challenge even if you're not
100 percent clear on how the sign and calls come into the whole thing.
All right so obviously we don't want to have 12 different lines of code to do this.
We want to do this with an isolate.
So let's use a for loop and we'll start off with I is equal to 1
and we want to keep going as long as it is less than or equal to 12.
And we want to increment by one each time
and then we're going to use this line of code.
Where we're going to take instead of 1.
We want to use.
And we're also going to need to increase the angle each time.
So we're just going to multiply that by which will take us further and further round the clock.
And similarly here
multiplied by.
All right then fingers crossed.
Let's take a look.
Wonderful.
So now we have a lovely clock face.
Now that all remains is the hands I mean I she don't need that 12 anymore either.
So we're going to need to get the time.
Fortunately we can get that from javascript's pretty easily.
So we'll gets the number of hours.
We'll do that from a new date.
Don't get hours will get minutes.
Which is another new date don't get minutes
and we'll get seconds as well.
Which will be new date
seconds
now.
Seconds is pretty straightforward because it's just between 0 and 60 Minutes is also pretty straightforward
because it's between 0 and 60.
But ours is not quite that straightforward and that's because not only is it in a 24 hour format but
we also need to incorporate the number of minutes in it as well because we do want to move it around
between the three and the fourth say as we get closer and closer to 4 o'clock.
So let's create a variable.
For hours
and first off we need to get it from a 24 hour to 12 hour.
Now the easy way to do that is to take hours and use percent 12 to get the remainder when ours is divided
by 12.
And so if ours is less than 12 it will remain the same if it's more than 12 essentially with subtracting
12 from it to get from say 23 to 11 and then we need to add to that the number of minutes which is just
minutes divided by 60 because we need to get that in hours.
And then for full accuracy we should also do seconds divided by 3600 for number of seconds in an hour.
Next we need to get the angle for each of these.
So let's have a variable hours angle.
This is going to be the angle of the hour hand from 12:00 which is actually reasonably straightforward.
We just get the number of hours so four hours and then multiply that by the number of angles for one
hour and one hour is two times math dot pi which is all the way round a circle divided by 12 because
its a twelfth of the way round the circle.
Similarly with the minutes angle and thats going to be minutes times tee times math PI divided by 12
and seconds angle is going to be the same so that just seconds times t times pi divided by 12 and then
to draw say the hour hand we'll use context.
Don't move to.
And then we want to start at the center of the circle which is clock radius come our clock radius.
So halfway along half way down and then we won't see draw a line too.
And this is the tricky bit again.
So I'll expand outwards.
Essentially we're going to want the same thing that we had here.
So on the horizontal we want exactly the same as that except instead of moving this angle around we
want to move the angle around.
And then the y coordinates we want to
use again the same as before.
So a clock radio to get to the center minus clock radio times no point nine times cause of the angle.
So how is angle.
And then we want to draw the line.
So context don't strike
a couple of quick things there.
Firstly I think I've missed a bracket off.
And we also need to set the stroke style
because otherwise it's going to be black so we won't see it on top of the face.
So I just said it to white and one more quick change as well.
I think we'll need to have a variable for the date rather than grab the hours minutes and seconds directly
from the new Date function and the small things.
Well I've forgotten the brackets after these functions Papazian and I've just noticed there but I've
got content rather than context.
Not my finest hour but there we go.
Let's run it and give it a shot.
There we go.
That's looking good.
And that is about the right times 2:51 here.
So a couple of things we didn't want to make that a little bit shorter in fact the our hand is usually
quite a bit shorter.
So let's make that about four point six.
And I think a little bit thicker as well.
So well use context it's line with
let's say five.
See how that looks.
Ok I'm pretty happy with that.
Let's add in now the minute hand so is all of this code again this time we'll make it a little bit thinner.
A little bit longer.
And will change.
Well maybe point actually.
And we'll change how is angle.
Two minutes angle and here as well.
All right.
Let's take a look.
OK that's looking good.
And then
we'll do the same for the second hand.
So make it a bit nicer again.
And then we want seconds and go
and seconds angle
and there we go.
I think I'll just make the seconds and go line a little bit longer.
So maybe we'll go all the way out.
Two point nine lovely.
And then before we make the clock work I think it looks a little bit ugly in the middle there.
So I'm just going to add a small circle in the middle.
To tidy that up attach.
So let's add a another path.
And then have an arc
and let's just try 20 pixels and we'll need the fill style to be white at that point.
So actually I can move that up
here too before we do that circle.
So let's take a look.
There we go.
That does look a little bit tight.
Yes.
I think I'll just make it a bit smaller.
Maybe 10 that will get much better.
I've just noticed something slightly strange with our hands.
They do pop all over the place a little bit.
I think that's because even though there are 12 hours in a full turn there are 16 minutes and of course
60 seconds
say that looks so much better
prelim.
So all that remains is to get this to update every second rather than just when the page is refreshed.
But that's easily done.
What we need to do is set this whole thing up as a function.
So you might call it set time
and then we want that function to be called every second.
So we use set interval and then set time every 1000 milliseconds.
And one final change that we'll need there is to set the Phil style tea black
just before the clock face is drawn.
Otherwise it will still be white from drawing the hands OK let's have a look.
It's looking great.
Fantastic.
That takes us to the end of the canvas challenge.
But now we're going to move on to just assorted HCM L5 cool features that we can use in our web sites
before we look in a bit more detail at CSSA 3.